Shiftstack 4.10 release notes (#42090)
openshift/openshift-docs: release_notes/ocp-4-10-release-notes.adoc

For more information, see xref:../updating/understanding-upgrade-channels-release.adoc#conditional-updates-overview_understanding-upgrade-channels-releases[Conditional updates] and xref:../updating/updating-cluster-cli.adoc#update-conditional-upgrade-pathupdating-cluster-cli[Updating along a conditional upgrade path].

[id="ocp-4-10-installing-cluster-on-openstack-ovs-dpdk"]
==== Installing a cluster on {rh-openstack} that uses OVS-DPDK

> You can now install a clusteron {rh-openstack-first} for which compute machines run on Open vSwitch with the Data Plane Development Kit (OVS-DPDK) networks. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now install a cluster on {rh-openstack-first} for which compute machines run on Open vSwitch with the Data Plane Development Kit (OVS-DPDK) networks. 
```

For more information, see xref:../updating/understanding-upgrade-channels-release.adoc#conditional-updates-overview_understanding-upgrade-channels-releases[Conditional updates] and xref:../updating/updating-cluster-cli.adoc#update-conditional-upgrade-pathupdating-cluster-cli[Updating along a conditional upgrade path].

[id="ocp-4-10-installing-cluster-on-openstack-ovs-dpdk"]
==== Installing a cluster on {rh-openstack} that uses OVS-DPDK

> You can now install a cluster on {rh-openstack-first} for which compute machines run on Open vSwitch with the Data Plane Development Kit (OVS-DPDK) networks. 

Author: ```suggestion
You can now install a cluster on {rh-openstack-first} for which compute machines run on Open vSwitch with the Data Plane Development Kit (OVS-DPDK) networks. The compute machines of your cluster then run their workloads with the benefits of OVS-DPDK.
```

> You can now install a cluster on {rh-openstack-first} for which compute machines run on Open vSwitch with the Data Plane Development Kit (OVS-DPDK) networks. 

Reviewer 2: The phrasing suggests that all workloads will then work with OVS-DPDK once you deploy on an OpenStack that supports it, this is not the case. You'll need to do take extra step to enable it in OCP, and it's per workload.

How about something along the lines of:
```suggestion
You can now install a cluster on {rh-openstack-first} for which compute machines run on Open vSwitch with the Data Plane Development Kit (OVS-DPDK) networks and have their workloads benefit of it. 
```

> You can now install a cluster on {rh-openstack-first} for which compute machines run on Open vSwitch with the Data Plane Development Kit (OVS-DPDK) networks. 

Author: ```suggestion
You can now install a cluster on {rh-openstack-first} for which compute machines run on Open vSwitch with the Data Plane Development Kit (OVS-DPDK) networks and have their workloads benefit from it. 
```

// TODO: Link

[id="ocp-4-10-installing-cluster-on-openstack-compute-machine-affinity"]
==== Setting compute machine affinity during installation on {rh-openstack}

> You can now select compute machine affinity when you install a cluster on {rh-openstack}. By default, compute machines are deployed with a soft anti-affinity policy, but you can also choose strict anti-affinity or anti-affinity server policies.

Reviewer 2: strict anti-affinity and anti-affinity are redundant, did you mean to mention the affinity counterpart?
```suggestion
You can now select compute machine affinity when you install a cluster on {rh-openstack}. By default, compute machines are deployed with a soft anti-affinity policy, but you can also choose strict anti-affinity, affinity or soft affinity server policies.
```

Author: AFAIK, `affinity` is discouraged, so your options are:
* soft anti-affinity (default)
* anti-affinity
* soft affinity 

Is this correct? @mandre @pierreprinetti

For more information, see xref:../updating/understanding-upgrade-channels-release.adoc#conditional-updates-overview_understanding-upgrade-channels-releases[Conditional updates] and xref:../updating/updating-cluster-cli.adoc#update-conditional-upgrade-pathupdating-cluster-cli[Updating along a conditional upgrade path].

[id="ocp-4-10-installing-cluster-on-openstack-ovs-dpdk"]
==== Installing a cluster on {rh-openstack} that uses OVS-DPDK

> You can now install a cluster on {rh-openstack-first} for which compute machines run on Open vSwitch with the Data Plane Development Kit (OVS-DPDK) networks and have their workloads benefit from it. 

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure what you mean by "have their workloads benefit from it." Will you please take another look and consider replacing a pronoun or two?

Author: ```suggestion
You can now install a cluster on {rh-openstack-first} for which compute machines run on Open vSwitch with the Data Plane Development Kit (OVS-DPDK) networks. Workloads that run on these machines can benefit from the performance and latency improvements of OVS-DPDK. 
```

Author: @EmilienM Are you okay with this proposed phrasing?

// TODO: Link

[id="ocp-4-10-installing-cluster-on-openstack-compute-machine-affinity"]
==== Setting compute machine affinity during installation on {rh-openstack}

> You can now select compute machine affinity when you install a cluster on {rh-openstack}. By default, compute machines are deployed with a `soft-anti-affinity` server policy, but you can also choose `anti-affinity` or `soft-affinity` policies.

Reviewer 3: Is your target user going to recognize those server policies? If not, consider adding a link or a sentence of context.

Author: The target user will, indeed.

For more information, see xref:../installing/disconnected_install/installing-mirroring-disconnected.adoc#installing-mirroring-disconnected[
Mirroring images for a disconnected installation using the oc-mirror plug-in].

[id="ocp-4-10-installing-cluster-on-openstack-ovs-dpdk"]
==== Installing a cluster on {rh-openstack} that uses OVS-DPDK (Technology Preview)

You can now install a cluster on {rh-openstack-first} for which compute machines run on Open vSwitch with the Data Plane Development Kit (OVS-DPDK) networks. Workloads that run on these machines can benefit from the performance and latency improvements of OVS-DPDK. 

// TODO: Link

[id="ocp-4-10-installing-cluster-on-openstack-compute-machine-affinity"]
==== Setting compute machine affinity during installation on {rh-openstack}

You can now select compute machine affinity when you install a cluster on {rh-openstack}. By default, compute machines are deployed with a `soft-anti-affinity` server policy, but you can also choose `anti-affinity` or `soft-affinity` policies.

> // TODO: Link

Author: ```suggestion
```

For more information, see xref:../networking/ingress-operator.adoc#nw-ingress-controller-configuration-parameters_configuring-ingress[Ingress Controller configuration parameters].

[id="ocp-4-10-openstack-dcn-for-enterprise"]
==== Support for {rh-openstack} DCN (Technology Preview)

You can now deploy a cluster on a {rh-openstack-first} deployment that uses a link:https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_openstack_platform/16.1/html/distributed_compute_node_and_storage_deployment/index[distributed compute node (DCN)] configuration. There are a number of limitations:

* Only {rh-openstack} version 16 is supported.

> * For {rh-openstack} 16.1.4, inly hyper-converged infrastructure (HCI) and Ceph technologies are supported at the edge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For {rh-openstack} 16.1.4, only hyper-converged infrastructure (HCI) and Ceph technologies are supported at the edge.
```

For more information, see xref:../networking/ingress-operator.adoc#nw-ingress-controller-configuration-parameters_configuring-ingress[Ingress Controller configuration parameters].

[id="ocp-4-10-openstack-dcn-for-enterprise"]
==== Support for {rh-openstack} DCN (Technology Preview)

You can now deploy a cluster on a {rh-openstack-first} deployment that uses a link:https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_openstack_platform/16.1/html/distributed_compute_node_and_storage_deployment/index[distributed compute node (DCN)] configuration. There are a number of limitations:

* Only {rh-openstack} version 16 is supported.
* For {rh-openstack} 16.1.4, only hyper-converged infrastructure (HCI) and Ceph technologies are supported at the edge.
* For {rh-openstack} 16.2, non-HCI and Ceph technologies are supported as well.
* Networks must be created ahead of time (Bring Your Own Network) as either tenant or provider networks. These networks must be scheduled in the appropriate availability zones.

> [id="ocp-4-10-openstack-dcn-for-enterprise"]

Author: ```suggestion
[id="ocp-4-10-external-cloud-providers-openstack"]
```

==== Support for external cloud providers for clusters on {rh-openstack} (Technology Preview)

> Clusters that run on {rh-openstack} now support external cloud providers. 

Reviewer 2: Do we need to mention it's behind the TechPreviewNoUpgrade feature flag?

Author: ```suggestion
Clusters that run on {rh-openstack} now support external cloud providers. This capability is available as part of the `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` feature set.

// TODO: Link 
```

For more information, see xref:../networking/ingress-operator.adoc#nw-ingress-controller-configuration-parameters_configuring-ingress[Ingress Controller configuration parameters].

[id="ocp-4-10-openstack-dcn-for-enterprise"]
==== Support for {rh-openstack} DCN (Technology Preview)

You can now deploy a cluster on a {rh-openstack-first} deployment that uses a link:https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_openstack_platform/16.1/html/distributed_compute_node_and_storage_deployment/index[distributed compute node (DCN)] configuration. There are a number of limitations:

* Only {rh-openstack} version 16 is supported.
* For {rh-openstack} 16.1.4, only hyper-converged infrastructure (HCI) and Ceph technologies are supported at the edge.
* For {rh-openstack} 16.2, non-HCI and Ceph technologies are supported as well.
* Networks must be created ahead of time (Bring Your Own Network) as either tenant or provider networks. These networks must be scheduled in the appropriate availability zones.

[id="ocp-4-10-external-cloud-providers-openstack"]
==== Support for external cloud providers for clusters on {rh-openstack} (Technology Preview)

> Clusters that run on {rh-openstack} now support external cloud providers. This capability is available as part of the `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` feature set.

Reviewer 4: This sounds a bit misleading, it's not "external clouds providers", it's just an external cloud provider will be used instead of a legacy in-tree one. Basically [1] instead of [2], it's just the code got moved in K8s, but we kept using deprecated version of it.

[1] https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-openstack
[2] https://github.com/openshift/kubernetes/tree/master/staging/src/k8s.io/legacy-cloud-providers/openstack

Author: @dulek TY! So, an external cloud provider is being used instead of a legacy one. Is there a summary of user impact we could communicate here?

Reviewer 4: Hm, in general legacy one was frozen, so we get some new features. I'd explicitly highlight an example of support for UDP Services of type `LoadBalancer`, but there's probably more that we haven't tested.

Author: Without more specifics, I can mention that. 

```suggestion
Clusters that run on {rh-openstack} can now use [Cloud Provider OpenStack](https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-openstack), which supports features like UDP services of the `LoadBalancer` type. 

This capability is available as part of the `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` feature set.
```

Thoughts? @dulek

Reviewer 2: I'd be cautions about listing the new features that comes with the external cloud provider until they are all validated by QE.

Author: In that case:

```suggestion
Clusters that run on {rh-openstack} can now use link:https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-openstack[Cloud Provider OpenStack]. 
```

For more information, see xref:../networking/ingress-operator.adoc#nw-ingress-controller-configuration-parameters_configuring-ingress[Ingress Controller configuration parameters].

[id="ocp-4-10-openstack-kuryr-resource-reduction"]
==== Reduction of {rh-openstack} resources created by Kuryr

> For clusters that run on {rh-openstack}, Kuryr now only creates Neutron networks and subnets for namespaces that have at least one pod. Additionally, pools in a namespace are only populated after at least one pod is created in the namespace.

Reviewer 5: nit: we need to specify the type of pods:
`for namespaces that have at least one pod on pods network.`
same applies to:
`after at least one pod on pods network is created in the namespace.`

Author: ```suggestion
For clusters that run on {rh-openstack}, Kuryr now only creates Neutron networks and subnets for namespaces that have at least one pod on the pods network. Additionally, pools in a namespace are only populated after at least one pod on the pods network is created in the namespace.
```

@MaysaMacedo Like so? 

And definitely "pods" and not "pod's" or "pods'"?

Reviewer 5: looks good to me

For more information, see xref:../networking/hardware_networks/configuring-hardware-offloading.adoc#about-hardware-offloading_hardware-offloading[Configuring hardware offloading].

[id="ocp-4-10-openstack-kuryr-resource-reduction"]
==== Reduction of {rh-openstack} resources created by Kuryr

> For clusters that run on {rh-openstack}, Kuryr now only creates Neutron networks and subnets for namespaces that have at least one pod on the pods network. Additionally, pools in a namespace are only populated after at least one pod on the pods network is created in the namespace.

Reviewer 3: In the second sentence, is "only" conveying the correct message?

Author: ```suggestion
For clusters that run on {rh-openstack}, Kuryr now only creates Neutron networks and subnets for namespaces that have at least one pod on the pods network. Additionally, pools in a namespace are populated after at least one pod on the pods network is created in the namespace.
```

[id="ocp-4-10-openstack-dcn-for-enterprise"]
==== Support for {rh-openstack} DCN (Technology Preview)

> You can now deploy a cluster on a {rh-openstack-first} deployment that uses a link:https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_openstack_platform/16.1/html/distributed_compute_node_and_storage_deployment/index[distributed compute node (DCN)] configuration. There are a number of limitations:

Reviewer 3: The ISG would have you rewrite to avoid "there are."

Author: ```suggestion
You can now deploy a cluster on a {rh-openstack-first} deployment that uses a link:https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_openstack_platform/16.1/html/distributed_compute_node_and_storage_deployment/index[distributed compute node (DCN)] configuration. This deployment configuration has several limitations:
```

* Only {rh-openstack} version 16 is supported.
* For {rh-openstack} 16.1.4, only hyper-converged infrastructure (HCI) and Ceph technologies are supported at the edge.

> * For {rh-openstack} 16.2, non-HCI and Ceph technologies are supported as well.

Reviewer 3: Is your target audience going to understand the additional capabilities in 16.2?

==== Support for {rh-openstack} DCN (Technology Preview)

You can now deploy a cluster on a {rh-openstack-first} deployment that uses a link:https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_openstack_platform/16.1/html/distributed_compute_node_and_storage_deployment/index[distributed compute node (DCN)] configuration. This deployment configuration has several limitations:

* Only {rh-openstack} version 16 is supported.
* For {rh-openstack} 16.1.4, only hyper-converged infrastructure (HCI) and Ceph technologies are supported at the edge.
* For {rh-openstack} 16.2, non-HCI and Ceph technologies are supported as well.
* Networks must be created ahead of time (Bring Your Own Network) as either tenant or provider networks. These networks must be scheduled in the appropriate availability zones.

[id="ocp-4-10-external-cloud-providers-openstack"]
==== Support for external cloud providers for clusters on {rh-openstack} (Technology Preview)

Clusters that run on {rh-openstack} can now use link:https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-openstack[Cloud Provider OpenStack]. This capability is available as part of the `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` feature set.

> // TODO: Link 

Author: ```suggestion
```

* The ability to delete operands from the web console using the `delete all operands` option is currently disabled. It will be re-enabled in a future version of {product-title}. For more information, see link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2012120[BZ#2012120] and link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2012971[BZ#2012971].

> * For clusters that run on {rh-openstack}, a bug in ovn-octavia-provider can cause load balancer listeners to be stuck in a `PENDING_UPDATE` state while the load balancer that they are attached to remains in an `ACTIVE` state. As a result, kuryr-controller can crash. To resolve this problem, update {rh-openstack} to a version that includes a fix as soon as possible. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2019980[*BZ#20004542*])

Reviewer 4: Kuryr is just one of the SDN options and not even the default one, so it's worth to underline that it's only affecting these clusters. Let's make sure not to scare anyone without purpose. ;)

Author: > Kuryr is just one of the SDN options and not even the default one, so it's worth to underline that it's only affecting these clusters. Let's make sure not to scare anyone without purpose. ;)

```suggestion
* For clusters that run on {rh-openstack} and use Kuryr, a bug in ovn-octavia-provider can cause load balancer listeners to be stuck in a `PENDING_UPDATE` state while the load balancer that they are attached to remains in an `ACTIVE` state. As a result, kuryr-controller can crash. To resolve this problem, update {rh-openstack} to a version that includes a fix as soon as possible. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2019980[*BZ#20004542*])
```

How's that? @dulek

Reviewer 4: Yeah, that's what I mean, thanks!

* Google Cloud Platform (GCP) UPI installation fails when the instance group name is longer than the maximum size of 64 characters. You are restricted in the naming process after adding the "-instance-group" suffix. Shorten the suffix to "-ig" to reduce the number of characters. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1921627[*BZ#1921627*])

> * For clusters that run on {rh-openstack}, a bug in ovn-octavia-provider can cause load balancer listeners to be stuck in a `PENDING_UPDATE` state while the load balancer that they are attached to remains in an `ACTIVE` state. As a result, kuryr-controller can crash. To resolve this problem, update {rh-openstack} to a version that includes a fix as soon as possible. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2019980[*BZ#20004542*])

Author: ```suggestion
```

> * For clusters that run on {rh-openstack} and use Kuryr, a bug in ovn-octavia-provider can cause load balancer listeners to be stuck in a `PENDING_UPDATE` state while the load balancer that they are attached to remains in an `ACTIVE` state. As a result, kuryr-controller can crash. To resolve this problem, update {rh-openstack} to a version that includes a fix as soon as possible. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2019980[*BZ#20004542*])

Reviewer 5: @maxwelldb It seems this topic is duplicated. Maybe we should remove the one in line 1644?

Author: @MaysaMacedo Nice catch! 👍

* Google Cloud Platform (GCP) UPI installation fails when the instance group name is longer than the maximum size of 64 characters. You are restricted in the naming process after adding the "-instance-group" suffix. Shorten the suffix to "-ig" to reduce the number of characters. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1921627[*BZ#1921627*])

> * For clusters that run on {rh-openstack} and use Kuryr, a bug in ovn-octavia-provider can cause load balancer listeners to be stuck in a `PENDING_UPDATE` state while the load balancer that they are attached to remains in an `ACTIVE` state. As a result, kuryr-controller can crash. To resolve this problem, update {rh-openstack} to a version that includes a fix as soon as possible. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2019980[*BZ#20004542*])

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* For clusters that run on {rh-openstack} and use Kuryr, a bug in `ovn-octavia-provider` <noun_goes_here> can cause load balancer listeners to be stuck in a `PENDING_UPDATE` state while the load balancer that they are attached to remains in an `ACTIVE` state. As a result, the `kuryr-controller` <noun_goes_here> can crash. To resolve this problem, update {rh-openstack} to a version that includes a fix as soon as possible. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2019980[*BZ#20004542*])
```

Author: ```suggestion
* For clusters that run on {rh-openstack} and use Kuryr, a bug in the `ovn-octavia-provider` package can cause load balancer listeners to be stuck in a `PENDING_UPDATE` state while the load balancer that they are attached to remains in an `ACTIVE` state. As a result, `kuryr-controller` service instances can crash. To resolve this problem, update {rh-openstack} to a version that includes a fix as soon as possible. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2019980[*BZ#20004542*])
```

Author: @MaysaMacedo What do you think of this latest proposed change?

Reviewer 5: LGTM

Author: Thanks!
